---
title: "Preparing grant applications"
---

The Preservation Alliance provides grants ranging from $1,000 to $5,000 for neighborhood preservation projects and grants of $30,000 for neighborhood improvement projects through its Vital Neighborhoods Initiative. Applicants for grants of $1,000 to $5,000 must complete at least the neighborhood description and the analysis of historic buildings and districts described in chapters 2 and 5 of this guide to be eligible for a grant. Other application requirements are described in the Guidelines for Small Grant Applications that can be obtained from the Preservation Alliance. The Alliance also provides grants of up to $30,000 and Service Grants in partnership with the Community Design Collaborative to invited organizations through its Vital Neighborhoods Initiative. Applicants for one of these grants must complete all of the exercises in chapters 1 through 5 as well as the exercises in this chapter to be eligible for a grant. An example of how a community organization completed these exercises is included in Appendix B. Applicants for a Vital Neighborhoods grant to improve the public environment are required to identify a target area and a specific block on which the organization intends to focus. Projects should focus on improving residential blocks in the target area, working on a block by block basis. Improvement to the public environment can include facade improvements and improvements to private property that contribute to the public environment.The Vital Neighborhoods Initiative is intended to improve neighborhood conditions and market values of residential properties by working outward from the strongest sections of the neighborhood. The analysis of residential sub-areas in Chapter 4 should have helped identify that section or sections of the neighborhood that have the greatest strengths and the factors that make that section or sections stand out from other parts of the neighborhood. If there are opportunities to improve this section of the neighborhood, then it might be selected as the target area and a block would be selected in that area. On the other hand, if the strongest section of the neighborhood is already sufficiently well developed, then it might be appropriate to examine the factors that make it such a strong area and explore whether these factors can be replicated on an adjacent block or on a block in another section of the neighborhood that already has some strengths but could benefit from improvements.

In the Washington Square West example, the two blocks of Clinton Street were identified as the strongest section of the neighborhood. These blocks needed no further improvement. Therefore, it would be appropriate to look for another target area. A primary reason why Clinton Street was considered such a strong area was the landscaped areas in front of each house, window boxes and brick sidewalks that complimented the historic character of the houses. In this case it would be appropriate to look at other strong blocks in the neighborhood to see if similar improvements on those blocks might enhance their quality and lead to improved residential property values. This would lead to the selection of one or more of those blocks as the target area. The project might then include a landscape improvement plan using a Vital Neighborhoods Initiative grant as a matching grant to encourage all homeowners to implement a program of landscape improvements, such as street tree planting, brick sidewalks, window boxes or something similar. Small streets were also identified as areas of strength in the neighborhood. Another approach to selecting a target area could be to select a block on a small street in need of improvement. The selection of a target area should arise out of the analysis of residential sub-areas in Chapter 4. It should be a relatively small area consisting of a few blocks where an impact can be created in one to two years. The selection of a project should involve the residents of the target area blocks and be informed by characteristics of the strongest sections of the neighborhood.

## Target Area and Block

Since Clinton Street and the small streets are the strongest areas of the neighborhood an illustrative target area has been selected close to Clinton Street and one that includes a small street in need of improvement so as to try to build off these existing neighborhood strengths. The target blocks are the 900 block of Spruce Street and the 200 block of South Hutchinson Street (see Map 5).

### Project, Part 1

The south side of the 900 block of Spruce Street is Portico Row, a distinctive row of houses with projecting porticos and high front steps (see photo). These houses have small fenced-in courtyards in between the high front steps that are either landscaped or paved. This adds a distinctive feature to the south side of the street. However, the north side of the street has no distinctive qualities even though it has some very distinctive houses (see photo)

The proposed project is to encourage property owners on the north side of the 900 block to incorporate some of the landscape features from Clinton Street. This would include:

- Creating small planting areas in between the projection front stairs of adjacent houses.
- Adding window boxes and shutters where consistent with the historic style of the house.
- Examining locations for additional street trees.This part of the project would offer property owners matching grants to make these improvements, notably the sidewalk planting areas.

### Project, Part 2

The second part of the project targets the intersection of Spruce Street and South Hutchinson Street. South Hutchinson Street is not as distinctive as many of the other small streets in part because the south end at Spruce is in poor condition. The second part of the project might be to work with property owners here to improve conditions, also through the use of matching grants. These efforts would include:- Working with the owner of the corner property on Spruce Street to either remove the stucco and restore the brick, or to paint the stucco a different and more attractive color, and to reorganize parking to create a landscape area along South Hutchinson Street (See photos).- Working with the owners of the small row houses on the east side to improve facades (through matching façade improvement grants) and to improve the sidewalk and planting areas. (See photos).

## Exercise 6: Identify a target area and select an initial project

Based on the information about sub-areas you identified in Chapter 4, identify a section of the neighborhood that will be your target area for improvement. The target area should be small, consisting of a few residential blocks that already have strengths or are located close to the strongest blocks in the neighborhood. An improvement program might be implemented over several years and involve several different types of projects. Identify the target area on a map and provide a summary description of the proposed project or projects that you would like to implement in the area, identifying which project would be the initial undertaking. Projects should focus on improving a residential block and have resident involvement in planning and implementing the project.In addition to this map and project summary, more detailed information about the project, its cost and time schedule for implementation is required for the Vital Neighborhoods Initiative grant application. The additional information required is described in the grant application guidelines.
